Paper Summaries
====

## Lambda Calculus Notation with Nameless Dummies - de Bruijn (1972)

de Bruijn introduces an integer based notation for lambda-calculus terms that avoids problems of variable capture and alpha-equivalence. A "namefree" term using de Bruijn indices labels bound variables by their distance from their binder. Free variables are treated similarly, but have indices relative to a list of binders for free variables artificially installed at the base of the AST (different orderings of the free variables results in different indices). Substitution is defined in terms of simple recursive equations over a term Sigma, requiring only simple manipulations of variable indices (in contrast to substitution with named variables, which requires binding variables to be renamed when they appear free in the term being substituted). Beta-reduction and eta-reduction are also defined similarly. Alpha-equivalence can be determined by simple syntactic equivalence of namefree terms. de Bruijn proves several theorems about properties of Beta-reduction, discusses applications to his dependently-typed language Automath, and outlines algorithms for converting between name-carrying and name-free terms.

## A Taste of Linear Logic - Wadler (1993)

Wadler introduces intuitionistic logic with emphasis on the Contraction and Weakening rules, and "alternative" rules for conjunction. He then introduces a lambda calculus based on intuitionistic logic to demonstrate the correspondence between logic and type systems. He also demonstrates the equivalence of proof-reductions and ordinary beta reduction of lambda terms. With IL firmly established, linear logic is introduced, with two forms of conjunction corresponding to the different formulations in IL. The first is A ⊗ B (both A and B), which allows both A and B to be used in future deductions. The second is A & B (choose from A and B), which is derivable from an assumption list that derives A and also derives B. Only one of A or B may be used in future deductions. Wadler's LL is based on Gerard's Logic of Unity, and distinguishes between linear and re-usable assumptions. The pling/bang operator (!) applied to a proposition A indicates an unlimited supply of A's and !A can be used to satisfy an intuitionistic assumption [A]. Pling allows IL to be encoded in LL. The distinction between `<!A>` and `[A]` is also required to prevent proof reductions from reusing linear assumptions. Finally, Wadler introduces a linear lambda calculus based on linear logic and notes the potential to de-allocate resources automatically (also, efficient mutation).

## A tutorial implementation of a dependently typed lambda calculus - Loh, McBride, Swierstra (2001)

This paper approaches dependent type systems from the perspective of a Haskell programmer. An interpreter for a simple polymorphic lambda calculus is constructed and then extended with dependent types by extending function space (->) to dependent function space (∀). Dependent data types are briefly discussed, but only in the specific cases of natural numbers and vectors. The paper's calculus is also unashamedly unsound due to the type of * being * (no infinite hierarchy as in Coq).

## Design and Formalization of Mezzo, a Permission-Based Programming Language - Balabonski, Pottier, and Protzenko (2015)
